---
title: Running Immutant
author: Toby Crawley
layout: news
tags: [ installation, lein, deploy, tutorial ]
---

Greetings! Today I'd like to walk you through installing Immutant and deploying
your first application. This is the first in a series of basic tutorials covering
Immutant features, and will cover installing Immutant and deploying a [Ring] based
web application. This tutorial assumes you are on a *nix system.

## Installing Immutant

The first step is downloading an Immutant distribution. We've yet to make any official
releases, but our [CI] server is setup to publish an [incremental build] every time
we push to the [git repo]. The latest incremental build is always available at
http://immutant.org/builds/immutant-dist-bin.zip. Go ahead and download that.

Once you have the zip file downloaded, unzip it somewhere handy. For this 
walk-through, I'm going to put it in `~/immutant/`. When unzipped, the distribution
will have the build number in the directory name. It's handy to have a consistent
path to the distribution, allowing us to download other incremental builds in the
future with minimal fuss. To do that, link the distribution to `current`. Here is
my shell session doing just that:

    ~ $ mkdir immutant
    ~ $ cd immutant
    ~/immutant $ unzip ../downloads/immutant-dist-bin.zip
    ~/immutant $ ln -s immutant-1.x.incremental.13 current
    ~/immutant $ ls -l
    total 8
    lrwxr-xr-x  1 tobias  staff   27 Nov  4 10:30 current -> immutant-1.x.incremental.13
    drwxrwxr-x  3 tobias  staff  102 Nov  2 17:42 immutant-1.x.incremental.13

Now we'll set a environment variable pointing to the distribution:

    export IMMUTANT_HOME=~/immutant/current

## Creating a Clojure application

Now that we have Immutant installed, let's create an application. I'm assuming you already have 
[Leiningen] installed. If not, follow [these instructions], then come back here.

The application we're going to build demonstrates the current web features. To get
started, let's create a lein project:

    ~/immutant $ lein init immutant-demo
    
Now, let's add a ring handler to our core namespace:

<pre class="syntax clojure">(ns immutant-demo.core)

(defn ring-handler [request]
  {:status 200
    :headers {"Content-Type" "text/html"}
    :body "Hello from Immutant!" })
</pre>

## Configuring the application for Immutant

We provide a [lein plugin] for deploying your application. It can be installed as a global
plugin, but we'll make it a local dev dependency for now in `project.clj`. While we're in
there, let's update to Clojure v1.3.0:

<pre class="syntax clojure">(defproject immutant-demo "1.0.0-SNAPSHOT"
  :description "A basic demo"
  :dependencies [[org.clojure/clojure "1.3.0"]]
  :dev-dependencies [[lein-immutant "0.1.0"]])
</pre>

As of this post, the latest version of the plugin is 0.1.0. Check [clojars] for the current
version.

Run `lein deps` to update the application dependencies, then `lein immutant` to see the commands
the plugin provides:

    ~/immutant/immutant-demo $ lein immutant                                                                                 
    Manage the deployment lifecycle of an Immutant application.
    
    Subtasks available:
    init       Adds a sample immutant.clj configuration file to the project
    deploy     Deploys the current project to the Immutant specified by $IMMUTANT_HOME
    undeploy   Undeploys the current project from the Immutant specified by $IMMUTANT_HOME
    run        Starts up the Immutant specified by $IMMUTANT_HOME
    
    Arguments: ([immutant subtask])
    
When Immutant starts up, it looks for a file named `immutant.clj` at the root of the
application. If that file exists, it is evaluated. This file is used to configure the
Immutant services you want your application to consume. You can generate a sample `immutant.clj`
by calling `lein immutant init`:

    ~/immutant/immutant-demo $ lein immutant init
     Wrote sample ./immutant.clj

The file has example code for configuring web endpoints and messaging services, but we're
just going to deal with web endpoints in this article. Edit your `immutant.clj` so it 
looks like:

<pre class="syntax clojure">(ns immutant-demo.init
  (:use immutant-demo.core)
  (:require [immutant.messaging :as messaging]
            [immutant.web :as web]))

(web/start "/" ring-handler)
</pre>

We'll come back to what `web/start` is doing after we get the application running.

## Deploying your application

Before we can start up Immutant, we need to tell it about our application. We do that
by deploying:

    ~/immutant/immutant-demo $ lein immutant deploy
    Deployed immutant-demo to /Users/tobias/immutant/current/jboss/standalone/deployments/immutant-demo.clj

This writes a *deployment descriptor* to Immutant's deploy directory which points back
to the application's root directory.

## Starting Immutant

To launch Immutant, use the `lein immutant run` command. This will start Immutant and
give you the console log. You'll see lots of log messages that you can ignore - the
one to look for should be the last message, and should tell you the app was deployed:

    ~/immutant/immutant-demo $ lein immutant run
    Starting Immutant via /Users/tobias/immutant/current/jboss/bin/standalone.sh
    ...
    (a plethora of log messages deleted)
    ...
    13:04:39,888 INFO  [org.jboss.as.server.controller] (DeploymentScanner-threads - 2) Deployed "immutant-demo.clj"
    
Now, let's verify that our app is really there. Immutant runs on port 8080 by default, so 
let's hit it and see what happens:

    ~ $ curl http://localhost:8080
    Hello from Immutant!

Yay!

You can kill Immutant with Ctrl-C.

## Now, some details

Remember our call to `web/start` earlier? Let's talk about what that is doing. To 
do that, however, we need to first talk about *context paths*. The context path is 
the portion of the URL between the hostname and the routes within the application.
It basically tells Immutant which requests to route to a particular application.

Immutant can host multiple applications at the same time, but each application must 
have a unique context path. If no context path is provided when an application
is deployed, the default path of '/' is used. The simplest way to do that is to 
specify a `:context-path` within an `:immutant` map in your `project.clj`:

<pre class="syntax clojure">(defproject immutant-demo "1.0.0-SNAPSHOT"
  :description "A basic demo"
  :dependencies [[org.clojure/clojure "1.3.0"]]
  :dev-dependencies [[lein-immutant "0.1.0"]] 
  :immutant {:context-path "/demo"})
</pre>

Now, when you call `lein immutant deploy`, the context path will be picked up
from your `project.clj` and included in the deployment descriptor and any
web endpoints your application stands up will be accessible under that
context path.

Which brings us back to `web/start`. `web/start` stands up a web endpoint
for you, and takes two arguments: a *sub-context path* and a [Ring] handler
function. The sub-context path is relative to the application's context
path, so a context path of "/demo" and a sub-context path of "/" makes
the handler function available at `/demo`, whereas a sub-context path
of "/biscuits" makes the handler function available at `/demo/biscuits`.
Make sense?

You can register as many web endpoints as you like within an application -
they just each need an application unique sub-context path. If we add 
this to our `core.clj`:

<pre class="syntax clojure">(defn another-ring-handler [request]
  {:status 200
   :headers {"Content-Type" "text/html"}
   :body "Pssst! Over here!"})
</pre>

And this to our `immutant.clj`:

<pre class="syntax clojure">(web/start "/biscuits" another-ring-handler)</pre>

Then fire Immutant back up with `lein immutant run`, we can see they
both work:

    ~ $ curl http://localhost:8080
    Hello from Immutant!
    ~ $ curl http://localhost:8080/biscuits
    Pssst! Over here!

`web/start` has a companion function for shutting down a web endpoint:
`web/stop`. It takes the sub-context path for the endpoint, and can
be called from anywhere. You aren't required to shut down your endpoints -
Immutant will do that on your behalf when it is shut down or the application 
is undeployed.

## Wrapping up

I hope you've enjoyed this quick run-through of deploying a web application
to Immutant. Since Immutant is still in a pre-alpha state, none of what I
said above is set in stone. If anything does change, I'll edit this post
to keep it accurate. I've posted the [demo application] we've built if you want
to download it. 

If you have any feedback or questions, [get in touch]! And stay tuned - our next 
tutorial will cover using Immutant's messaging features. 







