---
title: Using Datomic With Immutant
author: The Immutant Team
layout: news
tags: [ datomic, messaging ]
---

Immutant 2.x is just a set of libraries, usable from a standard
Clojure application. The [Datomic] peer client is also a library, so
in theory we can use Immutant and Datomic together in the same
application. But in pratice, it's not that simple.

The sticking point is [HornetQ] - Datomic uses HornetQ to connect
peers to the transactor and depends on HornetQ 2.3.x, while Immutant
depends on 2.4.x. We should be able to resolve this with the proper
dependency exclusions - the API that Datomic uses in 2.3.x is
available in 2.4.x, but there are two issues that prevent that from
working with the current stable release of Immutant ([2.0.2]):

1. Immutant 2.0.x uses the [JMS 2.0] API, which didn't appear in
   HornetQ until 2.4.0, so 2.4.x is required.
2. The Datomic transactor is running HornetQ 2.3.x, and a 2.4.x client
   can't connect to a 2.3.x server, so 2.3.x is required.

Hence our pickle.

But, all is not lost - with Immutant 2.0.x, you have two (non-awesome)
options for using Datomic, and if you are willing to use recent
Immutant [incremental builds][incremental] (and are willing to upgrade to
Immutant 2.1.0 when it is released in a few weeks), you have a third,
more palatable option.

## Option 1 - No Immutant Messaging

The first option for using Datomic with Immutant 2.0.x is to not use
Immutant messaging. This requires either depending individually on the
Immutant libraries you are using:

<pre class="syntax clojure">
  :dependencies [[com.datomic/datomic-pro "0.9.5206"]
                 [org.immutant/web "2.0.2"]
                 [org.immutant/scheduling "2.0.2"]
                 ...]
</pre>

or using the catch-all artifact, and excluding messaging:

<pre class="syntax clojure">
  :dependencies [[com.datomic/datomic-pro "0.9.5206"]
                 [org.immutant/immutant "2.0.2"
                  :exclusions [org.immutant/messaging]]
                 ...]
</pre>

But this means you can't use any of the Immutant [messaging features],
which isn't great.

## Option 2 - In WildFly Only

An Immutant application [deployed] to a [WildFly] application server
doesn't directly use any on the HornetQ APIs, and instead uses the JMS
API to communicate with the HornetQ provided by WildFly. That HornetQ
is ClassLoader-isolated, which means your application can bring in its
own version of HornetQ (in this case, 2.3.x via Datomic), which can be
used without issue.

But this means you have to do all of your development against an
application running inside WildFly, which isn't a great development
experience. With our ["dev" war], you can still have a REPL-driven
process, but it is definitely more painful than out-of-container
development.

## Option 3 - Use Recent Incrementals, i.e. 2.1.0

For the soon-to-be-released Immutant 2.1.0, we're working on
supporting [Red Hat JBoss Enterprise Application Platform] \(which is
a mouthful, so we'll just call it EAP). EAP is the commercialized
version of Red Hat's open source JBoss Application Server (now known
as WildFly), and the current version (6.4.0) is based off an older
WildFly that uses HornetQ 2.3.x. We'll cover what EAP support really
means in a future blog post - what matters today is that changes we've
made in Immutant to support EAP allow you to use Immutant messaging
with Datomic both in and out of WildFly (and soon EAP).

The only issues with this option is you have to use a recent
incremental build of Immutant until we release 2.1.0, and do a few
dependency exclusions/inclusions to make Immutant messaging and
Datomic play nicely. Luckily, we've figured that out for you! The bare
minimum to get things working is:

<pre class="syntax clojure">
:dependencies [[org.immutant/immutant "2.x.incremental.602"]
               ;; Datomic transitively brings in HornetQ 2.3.17.Final, which
               ;; overrides the HornetQ 2.4.5.Final from org.immutant/messaging
               [com.datomic/datomic-pro "0.9.5206"]
               ;; org.immutant/messaging requires this, but Datomic doesn't
               ;; bring it in, so we have to depend on it explicitly
               [org.hornetq/hornetq-jms-server "2.3.17.Final"
                :exclusions [org.jboss.jbossts.jts/jbossjts-jacorb]]]
</pre>

Now that you have it working, you'll probably notice that Leiningen's
pedantic report is chock full of warnings. Both Datomic and Immutant
have large dependency trees, so conflicts are inevitable. If you want
to get rid of those warnings, we've figured that out for you as well:

<pre class="syntax clojure">
:dependencies [[org.immutant/immutant "2.x.incremental.602"
                :exclusions [org.hornetq/hornetq-server
                             org.hornetq/hornetq-jms-server
                             org.hornetq/hornetq-journal
                             org.hornetq/hornetq-commons]]
               [com.datomic/datomic-pro "0.9.5206"
                :exclusions [org.slf4j/slf4j-nop
                             joda-time
                             commons-codec
                             org.jboss.logging/jboss-logging]]
               [org.hornetq/hornetq-jms-server "2.3.17.Final"
                :exclusions [org.jboss.spec.javax.transaction/jboss-transaction-api_1.1_spec
                             org.jboss.logging/jboss-logging
                             org.jboss/jboss-transaction-spi
                             org.jgroups/jgroups
                             org.jboss.jbossts.jts/jbossjts-jacorb]]]
</pre>

Note again that this option currently requires you to run a recent
[incremental build][incremental] (#602 or newer), which requires
relying on our incremental repo:

<pre class="syntax clojure">
:repositories [["Immutant incremental builds" "http://downloads.immutant.org/incremental/"]]
</pre>

## Get In Touch

If you have any questions, issues, or other feedback about Datomic
with Immutant, you can always find us on
[#immutant on freenode](/community/) or
[our mailing lists](/community/mailing_lists).

[Datomic]: http://www.datomic.com/
[HornetQ]: http://hornetq.org
[2.0.2]: /news/2015/06/22/announcing-2-0-2/
[JMS 2.0]: http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/articles/java/jms20-1947669.html
[incremental]: /builds/2x/
[messaging features]: /documentation/current/apidoc/immutant.messaging.html
[deployed]: /documentation/current/apidoc/guide-wildfly.html
[WildFly]: http://wildfly.org/
["dev" war]: https://github.com/immutant/lein-immutant/blob/master/docs/deployment.md
[Red Hat JBoss Enterprise Application Platform]: https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/jboss-middleware/application-platform
